---
title: Monads are just monoids in the category of endofunctors, what's the problem?
---

The title is from James Fry's classic [A Brief, Incomplete, and Mostly Wrong History of Programming Languages](https://james-iry.blogspot.com/2009/05/brief-incomplete-and-mostly-wrong.html), an hilarious rundown of various programming languages. It was itself lifted from an observation in Saunders Mac Lane's _Categories for The Working Mathematician_:

> All told, a monad in X is just a monoid in the category of endofunctors of X, with product × replaced by composition of endofunctors and unit set by the identity endofunctor.

Monads are known for being difficult to learn, and this phrase is a well-known joke in the functional programming community, the joke being that it doesn't make sense to anyone who doesn't already understand it.

The goal is to explain this statement to someone who knows some category theory (e.g. the definition of a category, functors), but has yet to put the pieces together.  

<!--more-->

We will go over the definitions but not in great detail, assuming the reader is familiar. We will also omit some technical requirements, such as commutative diagrams and coherence conditions. To start, we will slightly amend the statement for clarity:

> A monad is an example of a monoid in the category of endofunctors.

Or in symbols,

$$ M \text{ is a monad} \implies M \text{ is a monoid in the category of endofunctors}. $$

Notice that the implication is one-way, i.e., the converse is not necessarily true. More on this later.

## Monoidal Categories

A __monoidal category__ $(C, \otimes, I)$ is a category $C$ equipped with

- $\otimes : C \times C \rightarrow C$, a bifunctor called the __tensor product__.
- $I$, an object in $C$ that behaves like the identity with $\otimes$.

A __monoid object__, or simply __monoid__, is an object $A$ in $C$ with two arrows:

$$
\begin{align*}
  & \eta : I \rightarrow A\\
  & \mu : A \otimes A \rightarrow A
\end{align*}
$$

__Example:__ $(\textbf{Set}, \times, *)$ is a monoidal category where $\times$ is cartesian product and $*$ is any singleton set. A monoid object in this category is a set $A$ with functions

$$
\begin{align*}
  & \eta : * \rightarrow A\\
  & \mu : A \times A \rightarrow A
\end{align*}
$$

This yields the familiar definition of a monoid from abstract algebra, i.e., a set with a binary function ($\mu$) and an identity (given by $\eta$).

## Monads

Given a category $C$, a __monad__ is a triple $(T, \eta, \mu)$ with

- $T : C \rightarrow C$, an endofunctor on $C$.
- Natural transformations:

$$
\begin{align*}
  & \eta : 1_C \rightarrow T\\
  & \mu : T^2 \rightarrow T
\end{align*}
$$

where $1_C$ is the identity functor on $C$ and $T^2$ is $T$ composed with itself, i.e., $T \circ T$.

__Example:__ Again consider $\textbf{Set}$, and let $T : \textbf{Set} \rightarrow \textbf{Set}$ be the power set functor. Then $(T, \eta, \mu)$ is a monad on $\textbf{Set}$ where $\eta$ maps each $a \in A$ to $\{a\}$, and $\mu$ maps a nested set to its union. That is,

$$
\begin{align*}
  & \eta(A) = \bigcup_{a \in A} \{a\} \\
  & \mu(A) = \bigcup_{a \in A} a
\end{align*}
$$

## Category of Endofunctors

Every category $C$ gives rise to a category of endofunctors $\text{End}_C$. The objects in this category are endofunctors $T : C \rightarrow C$, and the arrows are natural transformations.

## Putting it all together

$(\text{End}_C, \circ, 1_C)$ is a monoidal category with $\circ$ as _functor_ composition. A monoid in this category, then, is an endofunctor $T$ with natural transformations:

$$
\begin{align*}
  & \eta : 1_C \rightarrow T\\
  & \mu : T \circ T \rightarrow T
\end{align*}
$$

This is exactly the definition of a monad! Putting it back into words:

> A monad $(T, \eta, \mu)$ is a monoid in $(\text{End}_C, \circ, 1_C)$.

## Coda

Remember this comment?

> Notice that the implication is one-way, i.e., the converse is not necessarily true.

This is because there is more than one way of defining a "monoid in the category of endofunctors". We have used the definition $\otimes = \circ$ where $\circ$ is functor composition. In this case, yes, a monoid in this category is exactly a monad.

But recall that the definition leaves open the possibility of using a different tensor product. In particular, we could take $\otimes = \star$ where $\star$ is Day Convolution. In that case we get a _different_ "monoid in the category of endofunctors", and in fact a monoid in this category is a __lax monoidal functor__, not a monad.